5R1C
====

Overview
--------

5R1C HVAC model aligned with ISO 13790's simplified dynamic method.

Purpose and scope:

- Captures key heat transfer paths between indoor air, internal surfaces, thermal mass, and exterior using five resistances and one aggregated capacitance (building mass). Better represents radiant/convective splits and envelope interactions than 1R1C, while remaining efficient for large‑scale simulations.

Conceptual structure:

- Capacitance C_m (building thermal mass) exchanges with internal surfaces via H_tr,ms and with indoor air via H_tr,is; windows and opaque elements couple to exterior via H_tr,w and H_tr,em. Optional sky correction via H_tr,op,sky.

- Internal and solar gains are split into radiant/convective parts and routed to air, surfaces, and mass using σ parameters.

- Ventilation losses are handled via H_ve (scalar or timeseries).

Notes:

- Implements the ISO 13790 simplified dynamic method assumptions (lumped mass and linear heat transfer). Parameter mapping follows standard notation.

- For even richer transient behavior and phase shifts, consider a 7R2C model (see VDI 6007).

Reference:

- ISO 13790: Energy performance of buildings — Calculation of energy use for space heating and cooling (simplified dynamic method).


Key facts
---------

- Method key: ``5R1C``

- Supported types:

  
  - ``hvac``
  


Requirements
------------

Required keys (specify in objects)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~


- ``H_tr_is[W K-1]``
- ``H_tr_ms[W K-1]``
- ``H_tr_w[W K-1]``
- ``H_tr_em[W K-1]``
- ``C_m[J K-1]``
- ``weather``



Optional keys (specify in objects)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~


- ``power_heating[W]``
- ``power_cooling[W]``
- ``active_heating``
- ``active_cooling``
- ``active_gains_internal``
- ``active_gains_solar``
- ``active_ventilation``
- ``init_temperature[C]``
- ``min_temperature[C]``
- ``max_temperature[C]``
- ``supply_temperature[C]``
- ``area[m2]``
- ``height[m]``
- ``area_m[m2]``
- ``area_tot[m2]``
- ``H_ve[W K-1]``
- ``H_tr_op_sky[W K-1]``
- ``sigma_surface``
- ``fraction_conv_internal``
- ``fraction_rad_surface``
- ``fraction_rad_mass``
- ``windows``
- ``gains_internal[W]``
- ``gains_solar[W]``
- ``ventilation[W K-1]``



Required data (specify in data)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~


- ``weather``



Optional data (specify in data)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~


- ``windows``
- ``gains_internal[W]``
- ``gains_solar[W]``
- ``ventilation[W K-1]``



Outputs
-------

Summary metrics
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~


.. list-table::
   :widths: auto
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Key
     - Description
   
   * - ``heating:demand[Wh]``
     - total heating demand
   
   * - ``heating:load_max[W]``
     - maximum heating load
   
   * - ``cooling:demand[Wh]``
     - total cooling demand
   
   * - ``cooling:load_max[W]``
     - maximum cooling load
   


Timeseries columns
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~


.. list-table::
   :widths: auto
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Column
     - Description
   
   * - ``indoor_temperature[C]``
     - indoor air temperature
   
   * - ``heating:load[W]``
     - heating load
   
   * - ``cooling:load[W]``
     - cooling load
   


Public methods
--------------


- generate

  .. code-block:: python

         def generate(
           self, obj: dict = None, data: dict = None, results: dict = None, ts_type: str = Types.HVAC, **kwargs
       ) -> dict:
           obj, data = self._process_kwargs(obj, data, **kwargs)
           obj, data = self._get_input_data(obj, data, ts_type)
           data = self._prepare_inputs(obj, data)

           temp_in, p_heat, p_cool = calculate_timeseries_5r1c(**data)
           meta = data["meta"]
           return self._format_output(
               temp_in.round(3), p_heat.round().astype(int), p_cool.round().astype(int), meta["index"], meta["dt_s"]
           )

